TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF MAGNETORESISTANCE IN Fe-Cr-Fe 
SANDWICHES

A. Chaiken*, T.M. Tritt, D.J. Gillespie, J.J. Krebs,  P. Lubitz,  M.Z. 
Harford, and G.A. Prinz, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 
20375

ABSTRACT

Resistivity  measurements have been performed as a function of 
temperature (1-300K) and magnetic field (0-10T) on 
antiferromagnetically coupled Fe-Cr-Fe sandwiches.    Two types of 
samples were studied:  MBE-grown  sandwiches  deposited 
epitaxially on the ZnSe (100) surface, and evaporated polycrystalline 
sandwiches deposited on glass substrates.  The magnetic saturation 
field Hs determined from  the resistivity r(H,T) is linear with 
temperature throughout the full temperature range for all samples.   
In the polycrystalline sandwiches, where the observed in-plane 
magnetic anisotropy is small, the linearity of Hs(T) implies that the 
antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange coupling A12 is also linear 
with temperature.  The magnetoresistance of the sandwiches  is 
constant at low temperature, and decreases linearly with increasing 
temperature above about 70 K.   

*NRC-NRL postdoctoral fellow.
Work supported  by the Office of Naval Research and DARPA.

PACS numbers: 75.70.-i, 76.50.+g, 75.60.Ej, 72.15.Gd


	The discovery of antiferromagnetic interlayer coupling1 and 
giant magnetoresistance2 in Fe-Cr superlattices and sandwiches 
raises a number of  challenging questions, both experimental and 
theoretical.   Recently several  models for the interlayer coupling3,4 
and magnetoresistance3,5 have been put forward, but so far detailed 
experimental tests of these models are lacking.   In particular, the 
role of the various  carrier scattering mechanisms (phonon, impurity, 
spin-wave, etc.) in the magnetoresistance is still unclear.   Because  
these  scattering processes  vary differently  with temperature,  
measurement of the temperature dependence of the 
magnetoresistance may give some insight into its microscopic origin.

	The temperature  and field dependences of the resistance were  
measured on both single-crystal and polycrystalline Fe-Cr-Fe 
sandwiches.   The   single-crystal  samples, which have been 
described previously,6  were grown by molecular-beam epitaxy 
(MBE) on ZnSe (100) epilayers on GaAs substrates.   The 
polycrystalline  samples were evaporated at a rate of 2 Å/second 
onto glass substrates held at about 200oC.   Fe films made by 
evaporation have  a (110) texture according to x-ray diffraction, but 
magnetization  and angle-dependent ferromagnetic resonance 
measurements show that they have an in-plane magnetic anisotropy 
of only a few Oe.  On both sets of samples, data were taken with the 
magnetic field  applied in the  film plane, using a dc current of about 
100 mA. 

	A typical H^I magnetoresistance trace for an MBE-grown 
specimen is shown in Figure 1.    At zero applied field, the moments 
of the two Fe films are antialigned due to the exchange coupling 
A12.1  As has been explained previously,6 at the  field indicated  in 
Figure 1 as HJ, the magnetic  moment of one of the  two Fe layers 
jumps by about 90 degrees toward the applied field direction.    
Magnetic saturation is finally  achieved at the field Hs.  In the 
analysis of the data, HJ is defined as the applied field where |dr/dH|, 
the slope of the resistivity, has a  maximum.  Hs is determined by 
fitting the linear portion of the magnetoresistance data for HJ<H<Hs, 
and taking the field at which the linear fit reaches the saturation 
resistance.  The fields HJ and Hs are shown in Figure 2 as a function 
of temperature for an Fe-Cr-Fe sandwich with a chromium thickness, 
tCr, of 16 Å.   Clearly the temperature variation of  Hs is well-
described by a  straight line, but HJ shows no temperature 
dependence within experimental error.  The temperature variation of 
Hs, though small,  is significant since Hs is a function of the 
antiferromagnetic exchange.  When H is along a hard axis, as in 
Figure 2,   the relation is:

		Hs = 4A12/tFeMs + 2K1/Ms     			(1)

where A12 is the interlayer exchange coupling per unit area, K1 is the 
fourth-order cubic magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy  
characteristic of Fe, tFe is the thickness of a single Fe layer, and Ms is 
the saturation magnetization.2,6   There is at the moment no closed-
form formula for HJ, but it is also  a function of K1 and A12.

	The saturation field Hs was determined for the evaporated 
samples in a similar fashion as for the MBE-grown samples.  The 
slope and zero-intercepts of the linear fits to Hs(T) for both kinds of 
sandwiches are presented in Table I.  Also included are parameters 
derived from a linear fit to Hs(T)  data  in Ref. 2.  This data was taken  
on an  MBE-grown Fe-Cr superlattice with twenty repeats of tFe = 16 
Å and tCr=12 Å.2 

	The magnetoresistance itself as a function of temperature was 
also determined from individual field sweeps like  that shown in 
Figure 1.   Figure 3(a) shows the  temperature variation of the H^I 
magnetoresistance for two MBE-grown samples, while Figure 3(b) 
displays  the temperature dependence of both the H^I and H||I 
magnetoresistance for a polycrystalline sandwich. The data for the 
other evaporated polycrystalline sandwich (not shown) are nearly 
identical to those in Figure 3(b).   From these plots one can  see that 
Dr/r(T) in all samples is nearly constant up to  about 70 K,  above 
which  it decreases linearly with temperature.   

	The values of the exchange constant A12 in Table I were 
determined using Equation (1) along with (K1/Ms) @ 0.25 kOe for the 
MBE-grown samples, a value determined by ferromagnetic resonance 
(FMR)  measurements.6   For the polycrystalline sandwiches,  which  
have a small observed in-plane magnetic anisotropy, Hs @  
(4A12/tFeMs).  The linearity of Hs(T) then implies that the 
antiferromagnetic exchange A12 is also approximately linear with 
temperature.   In the Fe-Cr superlattices, where the exchange is very 
large,2 the linearity of Hs(T) similarly requires a linear temperature 
dependence of the exchange.  The linearity of A12(T)  is a potentially  
useful clue about the fundamental nature of the  interlayer exchange 
interaction.    

  	Figure 2 shows that Hs for the tCr =16 Å MBE-grown sandwich 
increases by 0.48 kOe between 300 K and 77 K.  A previous FMR 
study of single Fe films grown on GaAs found that K1/Ms increases 
by about 0.06 kOe  when T  decreases from 300 to 77 K.7    
Assuming that K1(T) is similar for the Fe-Cr sandwiches grown on 
ZnSe epilayers, the change of K1/Ms with temperature can account 
for  only a  0.12 kOe increase in Hs from 300 K to 77 K.  Therefore  
the increase of Hs(T) in the MBE-grown samples, while  coming partly 
from the temperature dependence of K1/Ms, is dominated by A12(T), 
just as in the polycrystalline and superlattice samples.   Currently, 
efforts are underway to determine A12(T) and K1(T) independently 
by fitting the HJ(T) and Hs(T) data of Figure 2.

	The temperature dependence of the magnetoresistance in the 
Fe-Cr sandwiches is more complex.    Like Hs, Dr/r has two terms, one  
arising  from the intrinsic anisotropy of the Fe layers, and another 
arising from effects related to the interlayer electron transport.8 The 
Fe-layer contribution, which is known as the anisotropic 
magnetoresistance (AMR), is about the same size  as in bulk Fe.8  The 
AMR is a sinusoidal function of the angle between H and I.  It is the 
second term, however,  which is responsible for the anomalously 
large magnetoresistance reported in Ref. 2.   This anomalous 
contribution,  which has been called the spin-valve 
magnetoresistance, depends only on the relative orientation of the Fe 
moments, and not  on their absolute orientation.9     Therefore, the 
spin-valve magnetoresistance should be isotropic with respect to the 
applied field orientation.  This fact allows one to separate the AMR 
and spin-valve contributions to the  H||I and H^I data of Figure 
3(b): the AMR is the difference between the H||I and H^I traces, 
while the spin-valve component is half the sum of the two data sets.   
The  temperature dependences of the separate AMR and spin-valve 
terms are shown in Figure 4.    The AMR is nearly constant with 
temperature, but the spin-valve part of the magnetoresistance, while 
constant below about 70 K, has a  linear decrease at higher 
temperatures.  

	Barthelemy et al. have  suggested that the decrease  of the 
magnetoresistance  with  increasing temperature is due in part to 
spin-wave scattering.2   Interlayer  spin fluctuations  could also be 
responsible for the linear decrease of A12 with T.  In this regard it is 
relevant to point out that Dr, the field-induced change in resistivity, 
is itself a function of  temperature.   The temperature dependence of 
the spin-valve effect is  therefore not  just a trivial consequence of 
the temperature variation of the resistivity.   The data shown in 
Figure 4 thus contain real information about the scattering processes 
responsible for the spin-valve magnetoresistance.    At the present 
time, however, the true nature of these scattering processes remains 
unknown. 

	  There are still many unanswered questions about the Fe-Cr 
system.   For example,  Table I shows that the magnitude of the 
magnetoresistance in the Fe-Cr sandwiches does not appear to be 
correlated with either  the residual resistivity ratio or A12.   
Nonetheless, significant  progress has been made towards 
understanding the antiferromagnetic exchange and giant 
magnetoresistance of the Fe-Cr superlattices and sandwiches.3,4,5  
The linearity of the   temperature dependence of the 
antiferromagnetic exchange and spin-valve magnetoresistance  
should prove helpful in understanding the role of spin waves and 
spin-flip scattering in the Fe-Cr  system.   

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
		The authors would like to thank J.R. Cullen, K.B. 
Hathaway, and A.C. Ehrlich for useful discussions,  W.S. Rupprecht for 
help with data analysis,  and D.R. King and F. Kovanic for technical 
assistance.

1.	P. Grünberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, U. Walz, M.B. Brodsky and H. 
	Sowers, J. Appl. Phys. 61, 3750 (1987).

2. 	A. Barthelemy, A. Fert, M.N. Baibich,  S. Hadjoudj, F. Petroff, 
	P. Etienne, R. Cabanel, S. Lequien,  F. Nguyen van Dau, G. 
	Creuzet,  J. Appl. Phys. 67, 5908 (1990).

3.      P.M. Levy, K. Ounadjela, S. Zhang, Y. Wang, C.B. Sommers, and A. 
	Fert, J. Appl. Phys. 67, 5914 (1990).  

4.	H. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. B42, 2368 (1990).

5.	P.M. Levy and S. Zhang, to be published. 

6.      J.J.  Krebs, P. Lubitz, A. Chaiken, and G.A. Prinz, J. Appl. Phys. 
	67, 5920 (1990); J.J. Krebs, P. Lubitz, A. Chaiken, and G.A. 
	Prinz, Phys. Rev. Lett  63, 1645 (1989).

7.	J.J. Krebs, F.J. Rachford, P. Lubitz, and G.A. Prinz, J. Appl. Phys. 
	53, 8058 (1982).

8.	A. Chaiken, G.A. Prinz, and J.J. Krebs,   J. Appl. Phys. 67, 4892 
	(1990).

9.	J.C. Slonczewski, Phys. Rev. B39, 6995 (1989).


FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1:   Magnetoresistance data with H along a [110] direction for 
an  MBE-grown Fe-Cr-Fe sandwich with a 16 Å Cr layer. Here the 
magnetoresistance Dr/r(%) is defined to be 100*[r(H=Hs)- 
r(H=0)]/r(H=0).  The solid-headed arrows indicate the orientation of 
the moments of the two Fe films at a given applied field.    The 
positions of the characteristic fields HJ and Hs are indicated.

Figure 2:   Characteristic fields of an  MBE-grown Fe-Cr-Fe sandwich 
with a 16 Å Cr layer.   The fields  HJ and Hs are defined as indicated 
in Figure 1.   The  indicated  line fit  has the functional form Hs(T) = 
2.40 kOe - (2.44x10-3 kOe/K)◊T.
 
Figure 3:  Temperature dependence of the magnetoresistance for two 
types of Fe-Cr sandwiches.  The  error bars represent the uncertainty 
due to temperature drift.  a)  H^I data for two MBE-grown 
sandwiches. The fit parameters are: 
-Dr/r(T) = 2.0% - (3.3x10-3 %/K)◊T for the tCr=16 Å sample, and 
-Dr/r(T) = 1.4% - (2.2x10-3 %/K)◊T for the tCr=17 Å sample.  b)  H||I 
and H^I  data  for an  evaporated polycrystalline Fe-Cr sandwich 
with tCr=12Å.  Both applied field directions are in the plane of the 
films.  For H^I,  the fit is -Dr/r(T) = 1.5% - (3.0x10-3 %/K)◊T, while 
for H||I it is -Dr/r(T) = 1.0% - (2.8x10-3 %/K)◊T.

Figure  4:  Temperature dependence of the two components of the 
magnetoresistance for the sample of Figure 3(b).  The anisotropic 
magnetoresistance (AMR) is the difference between the H||I and H^I  
curves in Figure 3(b),  while the spin-valve effect is their average.    
The fit to the spin-valve data  is given by -Dr/r(T) = 1.3% - (2.9x10-3 
%/K)◊T.
