Session FB was held on Thursday afternoon and had as its topic
magnetoresistance measurements on multilayer films.  The session began
with an invited talk by Eric Fullerton of Argonne National Laboratory,
who reported on studies of Fe/Cr multilayers as a function of Cr
thickness.  The work of the ANL group has established that the
spin-density wave present in bulk Cr is indeed present in Fe/Cr
multilayers and that the effects of the SDW can be observed in both
temperature-dependent resistance and neutron diffraction studies.  Due
to roughness at the Fe/Cr interfaces, the SDW may be frustrated, and
novel domains structures may form in the Cr layer.

The next several talks concerned transport behavior in Co/Cu
multilayers.  Yiming Huai, now at Read-Rite Corporation, described
experiments at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory where Co/Cu
multilayers were grown on various different types of buffer layers.
While GMR behavior of a multilayer grown on a Cu buffer layer was
rather poor, the properties were greatly enhanced by the presence of a
Co seed layer.  M.J. Hall of Cambridge University discussed possible
sources of irreproducibility in the GMR of Co/Cu films.  He described
the results of annealing studies which show that the GMR depends only
on the remanence of the multilayers, demonstrating that it is the
fraction of the film which is antialigned at low field that determines
the size of the effect.  Daniel Jardine, also of Cambridge, discussed
what types of magnetic defects may be present in Co/Cu films with good
structural perfection.  Magnetic defects were studied by considering
the difference between the virgin MR curve of a newly grown film and
the smaller MR of a film that has been field-cycled.  Hideyuki Kikuchi
of Stanford University performed high-temperature anneals on Co/Cu
films and observed the effect on the MR.  He found that
irreversibility in the magnetic properties sets in above about 150 C,
with the high-field resistivity changing more than the low-field
resistivity as the annealing temperature increased.

The next two talks presented results on ion-beam sputtered (IBS)
multilayers.  Yasuyoshi Miyamoto of the Tokyo Institute of Technology
described the effect of bombardment of the growing film by an
ion-assist gun.  He and his collaborators found that the best MR was
obtained in permalloy/Cu multilayers with a 500V ion assist energy.
Alex Hubert of Erlangen University desribed the results of an
Erlangen/Siemens collaboration on IBS-sputtered Co/Cu and
permalloy/Co/Cu multilayers.  The researchers found the best MR
occurred in films grown with xenon sputtering gas and at the maximum
possible deposition rates.

Yong-Jin Song of Seoul National University described magnetoresistance
measurements on permalloy/Cu multilayers with a layer of Ni inserted
in the middle of the permalloy.  He described fabrication of the
multilayer into a VCR head and reported that the performance of the
device was well-described by an analytical model.  Dexin Wang of
Nonvolatile Electronics reported on an attempt to increase the
magnetoresistance of a spin valve up to the level of that of a
many-repeat multilayer.  The idea is that a few-bilayer multilayer
will have the same MR as an infinitely thick film if the boundaries
are perfectly reflecting.  An attempt was made to increase the
specular reflectance of the spin-valve boundaries by using a Au cap
and underlayer.  Encouraging, although not definitive, results were
reported.

The final two talks of the session reported on attempts to model
magnetoresistance in multilayers.  E. Tsymbal of Oxford University
reported on calculations of the magnetoresistance as a function of the
energy of conduction electrons.  The calculation was intended to
describe hot electron effects in the magnetic metal-base transistors
fabricated by the University of Twente, but may also describe
voltage-biasing effects in AlOx-barrier tunnel junctions.  Finally,
O. Andrieu of Grenoble reported on simulations of magnetic behavior in
discontinuous NiFe/Ag multilayers before and after annealing.  The MR
of these multilayers was anisotropic due to the sputtering geometry
used during deposition.
