"The Second PC Revolution: the Mobile Phone"
Michael Rayfield
General Manager, NVidia Mobile Business Unit

http://www.ewh.ieee.org/r6/scv/ce/meetings/meeting_detials.htm

The first half of the talk was a complete snore (smartphones sales are
increasing, iPhone is a landmark product, etc.), but the second half
was more informative.

Increasingly mobile apps are media-centric.  Larger screen size has
driven demand for more processor power in the mobile space.  Market
leaders in the mobile processor arena like T.I. (Omap) and Qualcomm
have focussed on the modem, as simple connectivity used to be a hard
problem.    These vendors have not adapted their outlook or products
to the new reality.    That's why NVidia has an opportunity to tailor
their GPUs to mobile and capture significant market share.

NVidia's new Tegra processor is an ARM11 implementation whose standby
power is much less than 1 W.    Tegra is fully featured, including a
Touch UI, HDMI output, USB 2.0 support, 1600x1000 display support,
NAND and DDR interfaces, and a host of other features that you'd
expect.    The emphasis in the product, though, has been on 
lightning-fast, low-power codecs implemented in pipelined hardware.
In a demo, Rayfield show a gutted netbook with a Tegra processor
running 1080p video at 1.3 W.    Hardware transcoding is supported for
HD as well as for audio.

The Tegra will play 10 hours of 720p HD video on a standard 140 mA-hr
battery.   When used for lower-power apps like telephony, photograph
viewing, etc., a handset that incorporates Tegra should run for days.

NVidia envisions that a diverse group of products will incorporate
Tegra, as it will be inexpensive.  They anticipate that the full
universe of music players, netbooks, MIDs and phones can be Tegra
devices.   The initial bricks included in the demo are running Windows
CE [!], but NVidia has also ported Android, etc. to the Tegra
platform.

The secret to the great power-versus-performance that Tegra has is
memory pipelining.  Through years of experience with high-performance
video, NVidia knows more about getting bits in and out of memory than
anyone else.  In contrast, the Qualcomm and TI processors really
thrash memory when performing media-related tasks.  The Intel Atom
processor is even worse, which is why the netbooks shipping now have
such poor battery life.  Tegra uses much less power when displaying HD
than the Atom in most netbooks uses on stand-by.  Tegra streaming 780p
has a 2-3x power advantage over comparable TI and Qualcomm products.
A second reason is that optimized hardware codecs are far more
efficient than software ones.  The power advantage persists for
customer-generated video and audio.

