To: nano@iop.org
Subject: Our decision on your article from Nanotechnology -
    NANO/199667/PAP/131315
In-Reply-To: <OF97F3E347.888F88AE-ON8025703B.00594981@iop.org>
References: <OF97F3E347.888F88AE-ON8025703B.00594981@iop.org>
X-Mailer: VM 7.18 under Emacs 21.3.1
FCC: ~/RMAIL-CC
Organization: HP Labs, Palo Alto, CA
---put your message below, chaiken---

Ref: NANO/199667/PAP/131315

TITLE:    Electron-beam detection of bits reversibly recorded on epitaxial
InSe/GaSe/Si phase-change diodes
AUTHORS:  Dr A Chaiken  et al

Dear Editor:

Appended are our detailed responses to the two referees, whom we thank
for a careful reading of our manuscript and the discovery of several
errors and omissions.  As you will see, we have made several changes
to the manuscript as suggested by their comments.  I have uploaded a
new LaTeX version of the manuscript to the IOP website.

Yours sincerely

Alison Chaiken

---
Alison Chaiken                          HP Labs
(650) 236-2231                          (650) 852-8579 fax
chaiken@hpl.hp.com                      http://www.wsrcc.com/alison/

First referee
-------------

Changes made:

1. "Please use ns instead of nS."

Response: Done (and for micros and ms as well).

2. "There is an older publication by A. Partovi et al. in Applied
Physics Letters describing an efficient near-field light source that
could be referenced in the introduction."

Response: We thank the referee for reminding us of the existence of
this paper and have added a mention of it to the first paragraph and
conclusions.


Response to other referee comments:

1. "are there any data on the volume change between the amorphous and
crystalline state?"

Response: As far as we know there are no such data on InSe.  The
dimensional change of InSe may be anisotropic due to its layered
structure, as pointed out in the text.

2.  "what is the change of band gap upon the transition ?  * where is
this change coming from?"

Response: We have no proof that the band gap is changing between the
crystalline and amorphous states although such a change would not be
surprising.  Amorphous indium selenide is unusual in being n-type
unlike all other amorphous chalcogenides and is quite a poorly
understood material.  Figuring out the contrast mechanism will require
considerable experimental and theoretical effort.

3.  Is anything known on the local order in the amorphous state ? 

The amorphous state of melt-quenched material is difficult to study
because of its small volume.  The as-deposited amorphous state is
discussed in one of our previous papers (J. Appl. Phys. 94, 2390
(2003)).



Second referee
--------------

Changes made:

1. "In particular, in results a separate paragraph to be called
“EBIC gain reading” should be introduced" "gain
values for the original crystalline layer, the amorphous bits and the
erased layers using the two erasing methods are presented in a
comparative way."

"These gain changes should be compared with those of fig.5 for erasing
by furnace annealing, where gain changes from 60 to 40 are
observed. No explanation is given for these drastic differences
between the two erasing methods both in absolute and relative values
of the gain."

Response: the referee is correct in pointing out that the discussion
of gain in various samples in the manuscript is incomplete and
confusing.  The apparent discrepancies stem from the fact that films
with different semiconductor and cap layer thicknesses were used in
different experiments.  The thickness of the various layers was listed
in the figure captions of the original submission but only a very
perceptive reader would have understood the connection to gain.
Rather than create a new subsection, we've added a new paragraph to
the end of the section 4.1 that discusses this question.  We thank the
referee for pointing out this omission.

2. "In par. 4.1 the expression “ the actual EBIC gain in
the background..” is misleading; it should be written: in
the “crystalline layer...”

Response: done.

3. "In the present paragraph 3.1 the first part does not belong to
results: its corresponds to introduction or discussion); the second
part should be in this paragraph, to be renamed: ‘Electronic
properties of the epitaxial diodes.”"

Response: We thank the referee for this helpful suggestion which we
agree will make the organization of the paper more logical.  We have
shortened the material and moved part of it to the last paragraph of
the introductory section and part to the last paragraph of section
4.2.  Paragraph 3.1 has been renamed as suggested.

4. "It is recommended to change the title of the paper to: "Electron
beam detection of bits recorded by material phase changes in epitaxial
InSe/GaSe/Si diodes.”"

Response: Done except that we have retained the word "reversibly,"
which highlights the primary distinction between our work and
ultrahigh density phase-change recording studies that have been
published previously.

5. "The legend to fig.6, 3rd line: Should read, 1.8 mW, 1 us
(microseconds, and not 1ms (without E) crystallization pulses (E), as
written in the text.  In 5.Conclusions is mentioned that "the fastest
observed complete erasure time for the amorphous bits is 100 us
(microseconds)...".  However in ref.12 , a paper of the same authors,
in fig.2, similar to fig.5 of this paper, is written in the legend
1.8mW, 1ms recrystallizing pulse."

Response: The correct recrystallization time for the data of Fig. 6 is
1 ms.  We thank the referee for pointing out the typo in the paragraph
beginning "Contrast retention."  The fastest complete erasure time is
in fact 100 microseconds as demonstrated in Fig. 9.   The apparent
discrepancy with Ref. 12 has been alleviated.

6. The last sentence: “In particular the photocurrent contains a
significant contribution from collection in the Si substrate while the
EBIC data do not” is wrong, as the authors themselves have expressed
in several places of the paper."

Response: It's certainly true that at the beginning of Section 3.3 we
say, "The EBIC gain is not zero at the amorphous bits because a 2 keV
beam generates a SIGNIFICANT number of electron-hole pairs in the Si
directly below them."  The offending sentence cited by the referee has
been modified to "In particular the photocurrent contains a larger
contribution from collection in the Si substrate than the EBIC data
do."  The modified version expresses the intended point of comparison
between the two techniques without further implications.



Response to other referee comments:

1. "the 1.0 and 15.0 rows are nearly invisible and are presumed to be
recrystallized, i.e. the authors do not know what they are measuring."

Response: We do know that the laser marks are amorphous as Figure 3
demonstrates.  Electron-backscatter diffraction images which are
discussed near the end of Section 3.2 corroborate amorphization of
marks made on other films.  The idea that erased marks are
recrystallized seems like the simplest explanation of the data.  While
many effects besides amorphization-recrystallization might allow
cycling between two electronically distinct states, it's hard to
believe that any phenomenon except recrystallization would cause the
erased marks to reproducibly match the unmodified film in EBIC gain
over several cycles.  Figure 10 supports the idea that high-quality
crystalline material can regrow, at least under some circumstances.

2. "The statement in the abstract that EBIC gain values up to 80 have
been obtained is misleading, because for the present application as
memory, the difference in gain from , both in the crystalline and
amorphous states is of relevance. (Furthermore the values of the gain
for the InSe layer alone should be taken into account)."

Response: The statement in the abstract that "Current gains up to 80
at 2 keV electron beam energy have been demonstrated" describes an
experimental datum rather than an authorial interpretation.  The
referee's argument that the value for InSe alone should be quoted is
hard to understand given that the quantity measured is the collected
current from a reverse-biased pn junction.  We agree that the contrast
is more important for a recording application than the magnitude of
the gain itself but assuredly the gain itself is of interest to
readers.  The original investigations of InSe/GaSe diodes by the
Valencia group were for a photovoltaic application where gain is more
relevant than contrast.

3. "the relative contribution of the InSe layer is calculated by
Monte-Carlo simulations (see Napchan E 1992 Microscopy Analysis
(November) 9 ;"

"Furthermore the primary electron beam penetrates the substrate which
thus contributes to the EBIC signal. This important contribution has
not been evaluated."

Response: We are aware of the utility of Monte Carlo calculations and
have had an active collaboration with an expert, Prof. Reynaud Gauvin
of McGill University.  Unfortunately the lack of knowledge about the
material parameters prevented a meaningful quantitative comparison
between these calculations and our data.  Monte Carlo calculations
prove to be quite complicated in the case of a multilayered film.
Furthermore the collection efficiency as a function of generation
depth is unknown in this little-studied semiconductor system.  The
analysis that the referee suggests is highly desirable but would
require information that simply is not available right now.

