_Riot Days_ by Maria Alyokhina Notes

Prisoners are as attuned to natural phenomena as backpackers. Both groups are at
the mercy of the elements.

The ability of dissidents to find humor in the buffoonery of their captors is a
major factor in keeping them sane.  Recall the Museum of the DDR, alternately
chilling (prison-transport wagons with coffin-like cells) and hilarious (the
Trabi exhibit, and that about plastic clothing).

The narrative feels like it starts in the middle in that we know nothing about
the history of Pussy Riot and its members. Were they already known in the West?
Had they made recordings without their real names?

The narrative is retrospective and starts in the middle.

Recall Djerassi Resident Artists' Program presentation about  "blue tiles, " the
dissident culture that vanished when the wall fell.

P. 66: "I spent a week in quarantine, and I had the whole day, every day,
free. If you call that freedom."

P. 71: "'Some, he said, "including in the West, have in fact interpreted it
[Pussy Riot's performance] as a freedom of speech, albeit frolicsome". But
Russian society would not accept such behaviour.'"

P. 73: "When someone gives a prisoner a pen and a piece of paper, the first
thing she does is draws a calendar."

P. 93: "Prosecutor: 'The charge was read in clear, accessible, literary
Russian.'" Perfect grammar: the last refuge of nonsense babblers.

P. 108: "There is no certainty or predictability. There is no fate. There is a
choice. My choice and yours, in each moment that demands it."

p. 139: "Once you betray yourself, even a single time, you can't stop.  You
become another person, a stranger to yourself.  You become a prisoner.  And that
means you have been defeated.  They will have truly deprived you of your
freedom."

p. 165: "I would like to live my life in such a way that whatever I leave behind
has something to do with freedom and truth, and not with the emptiness that
these words become as I speak them."

p. 169: "He must be the man in charge, he's wearing the uniform.   He must the
chief, he has the epaulettes."

p. 172: "It's just an illusion that you go on hunger strike to achieve results.
Yes, that's how it begins but, later, you realize that it's not for the imagined
outcome, but for the very right to protest."

p. 195: "Freedom doesn't exist unless you fight for it every day."
