
Spin-valve Magnetoresistance of Uncoupled Fe-Cu-Co 
Sandwiches

A. Chaiken*, P. Lubitz, J.J. Krebs, G.A. Prinz,  and M.Z. Harford, 
Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375


The coercive field of thin Co   films is strongly dependent on 
substrate temperature and film thickness, but the magnetic 
properties of  Fe films are only weakly affected by growth 
conditions.  Fe-Cu-Co sandwiches deposited on glass and silicon 
substrates via electron-beam evaporation exhibit plateaus in 
their magnetization curves when the coercive field of the Co is 
made larger than that of the Fe.      These plateaus correspond 
to an applied field region in which the Co and Fe moments are 
antialigned and the resistance is enhanced.   The isotropic  or 
spin-valve part of the magnetoresistance is as large as 3.3% in 
some sandwiches.     The spin-valve magnetoresistance has a 
broad peak  centered at a ferromagnetic layer thickness of 60 
Å.

*NRC-NRL postdoctoral associate

PACS: 75.70.-i, 73.50.Jt, 68.55.-a




	Two types of magnetic multilayer structures with large 
magnetoresistance (MR) have been found.   In the first type, 
such as Fe-Cr superlattices,1,2 antiferromagnetic interlayer 
coupling forces the moments of the ferromagnetic layers to be 
antiparallel in zero applied field.     The zero-moment 
configuration is thus  the ground state  for the coupled 
multilayers.

	In the second type of ferromagnet-paramagnet-
ferromagnet system which have large magnetoresistance, there 
is no significant interlayer coupling.    The zero-field moment is 
therefore nearly equal to the saturated value.  However, the 
moments of the ferromagnetic films may be rotated into 
antialignment by a finite applied field if the films   have 
different coercivities.    Different coercivities have been 
obtained in the Co-Au-Co system by growing the two Co films 
of a sandwich in a different fashion3 or with different 
thicknesses,4  and by exchange-biasing one of the 
ferromagnetic layers  in the  NiFe-noble metal-transition metal 
system.5   In these uncoupled sandwiches, the role of the 
paramagnetic interlayer is basically that of a weak link, whose 
presence allows the moments of the two ferromagnetic layers 
to be decoupled, and thus separately manipulated.    The 
paramagnetic layer in the uncoupled sandwiches is therefore 
analogous to the tunnel barrier in a Josephson junction, which 
permits the phase of the superconducting order parameter to 
be different on the two sides of the junction.     The analogy 
breaks down in detail because in the Josephson effect the 
junction conductance is modulated by the cosine of the phase 
difference between the two superconductors, while in the spin-
valve effect it is the resistance of the sandwich which has a 
cosine dependence on the relative orientation of the  moments 
of the two ferromagnetic layers.5,6

	Another way of obtaining unequal coercivities in  two  
layers of a sandwich is simply to make them out of different 
ferromagnets.      Previous workers employed this strategy 
with  NiFe-Cu-Co sandwiches.7   In the present case,  Fe-Cu-Co 
structures have been grown on glass or Si substrates using 
electron-beam evaporation.   Each sandwich was capped with a 
Cu protection layer about 30Å thick.  The specifics of the 
deposition and basic characterization have been discussed 
previously.8   Under appropriate growth conditions, as detailed 
below, the Co films have a coercive field of about 200 Oe, while 
the Fe films have a weakly growth-dependent coercive field of 
about 30 Oe.  The B-H loop of a properly prepared Fe-Cu-Co 
sandwich is shown as the tFe=40Å curve in Figure 1a).  The 
identification of the higher coercivity part of the B-H loop with 
the Co film is supported by a Co-layer-thickness study, which 
showed that the moment associated with the higher-coercivity 
part of the loop increases linearly with Co thickness.8

	  As a result of the sequential switching of the two 
ferromagnetic layers, the magnetization curves of these 
structures display a plateau of nearly constant moment about 
150 Oe wide.     In this plateau region, the moments of the Fe 
and Co films are macroscopically antialigned.   The resistance of 
the structure is  enhanced in the plateau region, as 
demonstrated by the tFe=40Å curve in Figure 1b).    The 
enhanced resistance associated with the antialignment of the 
moments has been called the spin-valve effect.5

	The solid curves in Figures 1a) and 1b) show the 
corresponding data for a sample with a thinner Fe layer, 16 Å 
thick.     Figure 1a) shows that reducing the thickness of the Fe 
layer has little effect on the magnetic properties of the Fe, but 
has the unexpected consequence of greatly reducing the 
coercivity of the Co layer.   Previous studies of the  effect of 
varying the Co layer thickness and   growth temperature have 
shown that the coercivity of the Co layer is very sensitive to 
both parameters.3,4,8   Nonetheless, it is surprising that the Fe 
layer thickness should impact the Co coercivity.     Since one 
expects that the length scale of the grains in a polycrystalline 
film should be approximately the same as the layer thickness, 
this result may be an indication that the coercivity of the Co 
film may be strongly dependent on the grain size.   Another 
possibility is that the Co growth may variously be fcc or hcp 
depending on the deposition conditions.   X-ray diffraction and 
electron microscopy studies are underway to investigate these  
hypotheses.

	Previous groups of investigators have observed 
antiferromagnetic interlayer coupling in  Co-Cu and Fe-Cu 
superlattices.9   The coupling in these superlattices has the 
form of an exponentially decaying sinusoid versus Cu 
thickness.  Ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements of 
the Fe-Cu-Co sandwiches have been performed to look for signs 
of a similar interlayer coupling.   No antiferromagnetic coupling 
is seen over a wide range of Cu thicknesses, although the  
possibility of ferromagnetic interlayer coupling cannot be ruled 
out.     The lack of antiferromagnetic coupling in these samples 
is not understood, since some of the Cu layers fall in the 
thickness range where it has been found earlier.9     For low Cu 
thicknesses only one resonance  is observed, rather than the 
two distinct resonances that would be expected for completely 
decoupled Fe and Cu films.    Even  samples with plateaus in 
their magnetization curves sometimes have only a single  FMR 
line.   The observation of only one peak is suggestive of a small 
degree of coupling between the Fe and Co.       Ferromagnetic 
interlayer coupling may be responsible for the square shape of 
the  magnetic hysteresis loops observed for sandwiches with 
thick Fe and Co layers, but with tCu < 30Å.   On the other hand,  
since  the Co coercivity is obviously very sensitive to the 
growth mode, interlayer coupling cannot be definitely 
identified as the cause.

	The magnetoresistance in the Fe-Cu-Co sandwiches has 
two components, the spin-valve part, which is unique to 
multilayers, and the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR), 
which is observed in both multilayers and single ferromagnetic 
films.  The AMR is entirely responsible for the 
magnetoresistance of the tFe = 16Å sample since, as Figure 1a) 
shows, there is no applied field region where the Fe and Co 
moments are antialigned, and thus no spin-valve effect.    
Because the AMR is typically about a tenth the size of the spin-
valve MR in these samples, the magnetoresistance of the 
tFe=16Å sandwich is much smaller than that of the tFe=40Å 
sandwich.  By measuring the angular dependence of the 
resistance at a large constant applied field, the two components 
of the MR can be separated  out even for samples where both 
contribute.5,6   The spin-valve MR and AMR thus obtained are  
shown in Figure 2 for a series of Fe-Cu-Co sandwiches with 
varying Fe thickness.     The AMR increases linearly with 
increasing Fe thickness, which is the straightforward 
consequence of the increasing fraction of ferromagnetic 
material in the sample.    

	The broad peak in the spin-valve MR versus Fe thickness 
has more physical content.   According to a semiclassical model 
of spin-dependent transport in these systems by Barnas et al.,3 
a maximum in the spin-valve magnetoresistance versus 
ferromagnetic layer thickness is indicative of a "bulk" origin for 
the spin-dependent scattering.    In this context, "bulk" means 
that the microscopic scattering events which give rise to the 
spin-valve effect occur primarily within the ferromagnetic 
layers, not at the ferromagnet-paramagnet interface.      The 
Fe-Cu-Co samples  have a maximum near 60Å in the spin-
valve MR versus Co thickness as well as versus Fe thickness.8   
In addition, Dieny et al. have observed similar peaks in the 
value of the spin-valve MR versus ferromagnetic layer 
thickness   in NiFe-noble metal-transition metal sandwiches.5   
The occurrence of a peak in the spin-valve MR versus 
ferromagnetic layer thickness  thus appears to be a general 
result in uncoupled sandwiches, consistent with the model of 
Barnas et al. 

	Figure 3 is a more informative way of presenting the 
data of Figure 2.   Here both the spin-valve Dr, the numerator 
of the spin-valve MR, and r(H=0),  its denominator, are 
displayed separately.     The resistivity is higher for the lowest 
Fe film thickness (tFe = 16Å), but is essentially constant for 
thicker Fe films within the precision of the resistivity 
measurement and the reproducibility of the total Cu thickness 
(97 ± 8 Å).    The numerator, Dr,  clearly is responsible for 
most of the variation of the MR with Fe thickness.       Separate 
comparisons of the thickness dependence of Dr and  r with the 
semiclassical theory3    should prove more helpful than fits to 
the ratio Dr/r in quantitatively understanding  the origin of the 
spin-valve effect.	

	In all the existing theories  of the spin–valve effect, the 
magnitude of the magnetoresistance   is determined by the 
relative carrier lifetimes for   spin-dependent and spin-
independent scattering processes.   For example, it has been 
proposed that the origin of the spin-dependent scattering is 
interfacial roughness,2  but clearly  interfacial disorder will 
also contribute to spin-independent scattering.  One might 
therefore expect that both Dr and r will increase with 
increasing interfacial disorder, and there are  x-ray diffraction 
results that support this conjecture.10        As a preliminary 
result,  the data of Figure 3 (and a similar plot for samples with 
different Co thicknesses8)  do not show a correlation between 
Dr and r for the Fe-Cu-Co sandwiches.  This lack of correlation 
may be due to the dominance of bulk scattering over 
interfacial scattering, as suggested by the peak in the MR 
versus Fe thickness, or it may have a deeper origin.   A 
detailed structural study of the Fe-Cu-Co sandwiches should 
help determine whether  the  important scattering events are 
due to  interdiffusion and roughness at the interfaces, or are 
influenced more by finite grain size and impurities within the 
ferromagnetic layers. 

	We thank D. King for the layer thickness determinations.  
This research was supported by DARPA and ONR.	


REFERENCES

1.  P. Grünberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, U. Walz, M.B. Brodsky and H. 
Sowers, J. Appl. Phys. 61, 3750 (1987).

2.  M.N. Baibich, J.M. Broto, A. Fert, F. Nguyen van Dau, F. Petroff, P. 
Etienne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J. Chazelas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 
2472 (1988).

3. J. Barnas, A. Fuss, R.E. Camley, P. Grunberg, and W. Zinn, Phys. Rev. 
B42, 8110 (1990).

4.  C. Dupas, P. Beauvillain, C. Chappert, J.P. Renard, F. Trigui, P. 
Veillet, E. Velu, and D. Renard, J. Appl. Phys. 67, 5680 (1990).

5.  B. Dieny, V.S. Speriosu, S.S.P. Parkin, B.A. Gurney, D.R. Wilhoit, and 
D. Mauri, Phys. Rev. B43, 1297 (1991); and B. Dieny, V.S. Speriosu, S. 
Metin, S.S.P. Parkin, B.A. Gurney, P. Baumgart, and D.R. Wilhoit, J. 
Appl. Phys., to be published (1991).

6.  A. Chaiken, G.A. Prinz, and J.J. Krebs,   J. Appl. Phys. 67, 4892 
(1990).

7. T. Shinjo and H. Yamamoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 59, 3061 (1990).

8. A. Chaiken, P. Lubitz, J.J. Krebs, G.A. Prinz, and M.Z. Harford, to be 
published.

9. A. Cebollada, J.L. Martinez, J.M. Gallego, J.J. de Miguel, R. Miranda, 
S. Ferrer, F. Batallan, G. Fillion, and J.P. Rebouillat, Phys. Rev. B39, 
9726 (1989); B. Heinrich, Z. Celinski, J.F. Cochran, W.B. Muir, J. Rudd, 
Q.M. Zhong, A.S. Arrott, K. Myrtle, and J. Kirschner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
64, 673 (1990); W.R. Bennett, W. Schwarzacher, and W.F. Egelhoff, Jr., 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3169 (1990).

10. E.E. Fullerton, I.K. Schuller, F.T. Parker, M. Grimsditch, C.H. Sowers, 
W. Robertson, S. Kumar, Ph. Belien, and Y. Bruynseraede, J. Appl. 
Phys., to be published (1991).



FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1.  a) Magnetization curves for two Fe(tFe)-Cu(61Å)-Co(55Å)-
Cu(36Å) sandwiches grown at  160 ˚C.  The  curve indicated by  
squares is for a tFe = 40Å sandwich grown on silicon, and the solid 
line is for a tFe = 16Å sandwich on glass.   The plateau region in the 
tFe=40Å curve corresponds to the region where the Fe and Co 
moments are antialigned.  b) Transverse (applied field perpendicular 
to current) MR traces for two Fe(tFe)-Cu(61Å)-Co(55Å)-Cu(36Å) 
sandwiches both grown on  semi-insulating silicon.  The  tFe=40Å  
sample is the  one whose magnetization curve is shown in a).    The 
tFe=16Å sample  was deposited  at the same time as the tFe=16Å 
sample on glass  whose data are shown in a).    The MR data for the  
tFe=16Å sample are multiplied by a factor of 10 for clarity.    The  
MR is defined by Dr/r = [rmax - r(H=Hs)]/r(H=0).  

Figure 2.   Spin-valve MR and anisotropic MR (AMR) versus Fe 
thickness for a series of 5 Fe(tFe)-Cu(61Å)-Co(55Å)-Cu(36Å) 
sandwiches grown on silicon substrates at 160 ˚C.    The spin-valve 
MR is the isotropic component of the total MR.   The dashed line is a 
fit to the AMR data with form AMR = 0.097% + (0.002%/Å)xtFe.

Figure 3.    Spin-valve Dr and r  values versus Fe thickness for the 
samples whose Dr/r is shown in Figure 2.     The thickness variation 
of the MR is clearly dominated by the change in Dr, the numerator of 
the expression, although the increase in r for low Fe (or Co) 
thicknesses also plays a role.
