 Electronic and Atomic Structure of Metastable Phases 
of Boron Nitride using Core-Level Photoabsorption

A.  Chaiken, L.J. Terminello and J. Wong, 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94551

G.L. Doll ,
Physics Department,
 GM Research Laboratory,  Warren, MI 48090

Soft x-ray core-level photoabsorption has been measured from  three forms of  
boron nitride, namely the hexagonal (hBN), cubic (cBN), and incoherent (iBN) 
phases.  The B 1s and N 1s photoabsorption spectra of the hBN sample show 
evidence of both s*- and p* -empty states, indicative of sp2   bonding, while the 
cBN absorption  spectra exhibits only sp3  bonding in absorption features 
characteristic of the zincblende structure.    The incoherent phase of  BN in the 
form of a thin film on a Si substrate possesses s* and p* states similar to hBN.  
The B 1s p* absorption features of the iBN film  show an angular dependence 
which suggests that the microstructure consists of hexagonal-phase layer planes 
oriented normal to the BN/Si interface.

	Group III-nitrides, in particular, boron nitride, have attractive properties 
for both  tribological coatings and electronic applications. 1, 2      Boron nitride is 
being incorporated into thin-film technology through growth of metastable BN 
layers under non-equilibrium conditions.     Recent work has shown that 
preferentially oriented cubic boron nitride (cBN) can be grown on Si using 
pulsed laser deposition.  3     Other  phases of BN been prepared in bulk form under 
high applied pressure. 
	Near-edge  x-ray-absorption fine-structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy offers 
a  powerful means to study the electronic and bonding structure of solids, thin 
films, and adsorbates.  4      In particular, the elemental specificity of core-level, soft 
x-ray absorption can measure the characteristics of overlayers without 
interference from  any substrate signal.  Angle-dependent studies that take 
advantage of the near-linear  intrinsic polarization of synchrotron radiation can 
elucidate p bond-orientation   in these materials.   Here we have used the core-
level photoabsorption method to characterize the element-specific bonding in a 
thin-film of incoherent phase BN on Si (iBN).  
	The cBN and hBN samples used in this study were randomly oriented 
powders that were attached to a Ta substrate with conductive silver epoxy.  The 
1000Å iBN/Si film was prepared using ion-assisted, pulsed-laser  deposition 
under conditions similar to those described previously.  3    X-ray diffraction 
studies of similarly prepared films have shown no evidence for long-range 
structural ordering, indicating an incoherent or fine-grained structure with a 
characteristic size less than about 200 nm.  5        Other BN thin film growth 
conditions, such as ion-assisted electron-beam  evaporation with high deposition 
rates, have been shown to give an incoherent structure as well. 6  
	NEXAFS spectra were measured both at the IBM/U8 beam line at the 
National Synchrotron Light Source and at the 8-1 beamline at the Stanford 
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory.    At NSLS, soft x-ray absorption was 
measured in the secondary-electron, partial-yield mode that monitors the 0-10 eV 
electron intensity as a function of monochromatic photon energy.    At SSRL, the 
total electron yield was measured by monitoring the current flowing  from 
ground into the sample with a picoammeter.      Agreement between these two 
methods of data  collection is excellent, as will be shown below.
	The B and N 1s core-level photoabsorption spectra are shown in Figure 1.  
Angle-dependent spectra were measured on the iBN thin-film  by rotating the 
samples with respect to the incident x-ray beam linear polarization.    The 
measurement geometry  is illustrated in the inset to Figure 2.    
	Using the analysis methods described by Stöhr and Outka, 4   the hBN, 
cBN, and iBN B and N 1s (Figure 1(a) and (b)) NEXAFS  spectra have been 
normalized to the background at 185 eV predicated on the fact that the secondary 
electron yield well below the continuum excitation threshold should be angle-
independent.      The most striking feature of the B 1s spectra is the well-defined 
peak near 192.0 eV measured from the hBN sample.  Previous work 7, 8  has 
identified the narrow feature at 192.0 eV to be an excitation from the 1s initial 
state to a  quasi-bound p*  final state.   Similar  features have been seen in the 
spectra of adsorbed organic species with p-conjugated bonds. 4   The strong 1s-p* 
empty-band resonance is absent in the cBN, as  anticipated.   The broad series of 
features above 194 eV in the cBN spectrum correspond to  transitions to s* final 
states or shape resonances and and are consistent with the expected sp3  bonding 
of this material.  The iBN  B 1s spectrum  exhibits a sharp peak that can be clearly 
identified as a p* resonance.  Thus, these measurements provide strong 
spectroscopic evidence that the iBN thin-film is comprised of sp2- bonded  boron 
and nitrogen.  Close examination of the broad p* peak in the iBN sample shows 
that it is actually a manifold of four partially resolved components. 9  
	The normal incidence N1s spectra for the three BN specimens are 
displayed in Figure 1(b).    The p* and s* portions of the spectra are less distinct 
than at the B 1s edge, but overall the same qualitative statements hold as for 
Figure 1(a): the p*  peak dominates the hBN and iBN spectra, but is absent in the 
N 1s spectrum measured from  the cBN sample, which exhibits only the large, 
broad s* absorption.  
	Earlier work identified the p*  and s* resonances  of pyrolitic BN and then 
determined the alignment of crystallites in hBN by examining the angular 
dependence of the B 1s -p* features.  7, 8      According to dipole selection rules, the 
matrix element  should have a cosine-squared dependence on the angle between 
the bond and the electric field vector. 4      The B 1s spectra measured from the iBN 
sample at various incident polar angles q are shown in Figure  2.   As can easily 
be seen, the p* resonance intensity has a strong angle dependence.   
	The angle-dependent photoabsorption data of Figure 2 depicts a more 
intense p* resonance near normal incidence (q = 0°) than near grazing incidence 
(q = 90∞).   This result is surprising because it suggests that the atomic p orbitals 
that constitute the p  bonds and the associated BN c-axis lie preferentially in the 
plane of the film for this  incoherent specimen.    In order to quantitatively 
determine the orientation of the p  bonds, integrated intensities were computed 
from non-linear least squares fits to the B 1s p*  spectra using  the convolution of 
a Lorentzian lineshape with a fixed 65 meV Gaussian for each peak in the case of 
the NSLS data and 320 meV in case of the SSRL data.     The Gaussian broadening 
reflects the core-hole lifetime, solid-state effects, and instrumental broadening 
contributions to the line shape.   Details  will be published elsewhere. 9      
	The angular dependence of these integrated intensities is shown in Figure 
3, along with two sinusoidal curves  for comparison.    An ideal fit to the cos2q  
angular dependence would indicate that the hexagonal planes lie orthogonal to 
the plane of the film.    While this orientation seems unlikely, recently electron-
diffraction measurements on hBN films fabricated by ion plating have indicated 
that the hexagonal planes are oriented near normal to the surface of the film.  10     
The cos2(q - 20°) curve actually fits the data better, as the figure shows.    
Azimuthal rotation of the iBN film has shown no evidence for in-plane 
preferential orientation, which eliminates the possibility that that the layer planes 
are simply tilted 20° away from the interface normal.       While possible mosaic 
spread of the crystal can broaden the angular dependence of the intensity, it 
cannot explain the occurrence of the maximum at q π 0°.    The simplest 
explanation of the intensity maximum at q ª 20° is that some part of the film has 
differently oriented hexagonal planes.
	The growth of hBN in small crystallites with the hexagonal planes 
oriented normal to the substrate interface was unexpected since one expects thin 
films to grow in a close-packed orientation to minimize the number of 
undercoordinated atoms.   However, this result is less surprising if one considers 
that the conditions used to prepare this sample are only slightly different from 
those used to grow the metastable cubic phase. 3     Recent work has shown that 
small variations in substrate temperature, laser fluence, ion fluence, and gas 
pressure will produce BN thin films of  hexagonal, cubic, or incoherent 
structure.  6        McKenzie  has suggested that in-plane compressive stress due to 
ion bombardment during growth may orient the highly-compressible c-axis 
parallel to the surface. 10      Further work will be necessary to elucidate the 
relationship between substrate temperature, stress, and ion bombardment in 
order to test this hypothesis. 
	NEXAFS has been measured on the cubic, hexagonal and incoherent 
forms of boron nitride.    B 1s and N1s absorption edge data measured from the 
hBN phase sample clearly shows both p* and s* features, revealing the expected 
sp2   bonding, while the cBN  sample shows only the  s* manifold, indicative of 
sp3  bonding.  Boron and nitrogen 1s photoabsorption was also measured from a 
thin film of iBN on Si.  Direct comparison to the hBN and cBN NEXAFS spectra 
clearly indicated sp2  bonding in the iBN film because of the prominent p* 
absorption feature.  The angular dependence of the integrated intensity of the B 
1s p* absorption for the iBN film shows microcrystalline hexagonal layer planes  
which are oriented normal to the film surface, contrary to the usual growth  
mode of hBN.   The observation of a preferred bond order in an apparently 
disordered film demonstrates the power  of the NEXAFS  technique to resolve 
structural features in microcrystalline samples.   	
	The authors would like to thank C.A. Taylor II  for help with film 
preparation and G.D. Waddill  and R.H. Howell for helpful discussions about the 
data analysis. This work was conducted under the auspices of the US 
Department of Energy by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under 
contract No. W-7405-ENG-48, and was performed at the National Synchrotron 
Light Source, Brookhaven National Laboratory and at Stanford Synchrotron 
Radiation Laboratory, which are both supported by the Department of Energy, 
Office of Basic Energy Sciences.

 1.	R. F. Davis, Proc. IEEE  79, 702 (1991).

2.	J. H. Edgar, J. Mater. Res.  7, 235 (1992).

3.	A. L. Ballal, L. Salamanca Riba, G. L. Doll, C. A. Taylor II, and  R. Clarke, J. 
Mater. Res.  7, 1618 (1992).

4.	J. Stöhr, NEXAFS Spectroscopy.   (Springer Verlag, New York, 1992).

5.	C. A. Taylor II, S. Kidner, and  R. Clarke, unpublished.

6.	T. Wada and N. Yamashita, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.  A10, 515 (1992).

7.	B. M. Davies, F. Bassani, F. C. Brown, and  C. G. Olson, Phys. Rev.  B24, 
3537 (1981).

8.	A. Mansour and S. E. Schnatterly, Phys. Rev.  B36, 9234 (1987).

9.	A. Chaiken, L. J. Terminello, and  G. L. Doll, unpublished.

10.	D. R. McKenzie, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. , to be published (1993).
 

Figure 1.  (a) Normal-incidence B 1s absorption spectra of the three types of BN.    
The spectra have been vertically offset and the cBN spectrum divided by 3 for 
clarity.  The feature near 192.0 eV has p* final-state character,  while the bands 
above about 194 eV  have s* final-state character.     As expected, the cBN shows 
only s-bonding.    (b) Normal-incidence N 1s absorption spectra of the three 
types of BN.   The spectra have been offset as in (a).  Once again, lower-energy p* 
features are prominent in the hBN and iBN.

Figure 2. Angular dependence of the B 1s absorption spectra for the iBN film.    
The inset shows that q is the polar angle between the incident x-ray wavevector 
and the normal to the surface of the film.   The spectra have been vertically 
separated for ease of comparison.  The p*  features are largest near normal 
incidence and  decrease in normalized intensity as the angle between the incident 
x-ray beam and the surface normal increases.

Figure 3. Angular variation of the integrated intensity of the  largest peak in the 
p* portion of the iBN B 1s spectra.    The form I (q) = cos2q is expected if the 
hexagonal layer planes lie orthogonal to the Si surface with the p bonds in the 
plane of the film.
