
Ultrahigh Density Optical Recording on Epitaxial 
InSe/GaSe Phase-Change Media Films

A. Chaiken, G.A. Gibson, K. Nauka and C.C. Yang
Hewlett-Packard Labs, Palo Alto CA

B.-S. Yeh, R. Bicknell-Tassius, J. Chen, D. D. Lindig and H. Liao
Imaging and Printing Group, Hewlett-Packard 

J. Jasinski and Z. Liliental-Weber
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Berkeley CA

Commercially available rewritable DVD and CD products use 
laser diodes to mark on GeSbTe or InAgSbTe phase-change 
media.  A higher density recording scheme using electron 
beams to write on phase-change media has been proposed.[1] 
At the bit density contemplated in the electron-beam 
project, traditional polycrystalline phase-change media are 
too inhomogeneous.   A solution is to use epitaxial films 
with a minimum number of defects at small length scales.  
We describe optical recording studies on MBE-grown 
epitaxial InSe/GaSe/Si heterojunction diode films.  
Amorphous bits as small as 100 nm in diameter have been 
made using short laser pulses (30 ns) that are less than 
the thermal equilibration time of the stack.   These tiny 
optically produced bits offer a convenient surrogate for 
the even smaller bits to be made with high-power electron-
beam sources in the future. The amorphization has been 
confirmed using techniques such as reflectivity, electron 
beam-induced current (EBIC), atomic force microscopy and 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM).

Recrystallization of the amorphous regions has been 
accomplished using lower-power millisecond laser pulses.  
Up to 100 write-erase cycles with partial restoration of 
reflectivity and EBIC have been achieved.  Electron 
microscopy studies suggest that the recrystallization 
starts at the edge of the amorphous region and propagates 
into the center.  The ability to cycle the material has 
been limited by damage to the surface, which due to the 
limited electron penetration depth cannot be clad with the 
thick dielectric protective layers used in CD-RW/DVD 
products.  

[1] "A Decade Away: Atomic Resolution Storage," Scientific 
American,    May 2000 issue.





