Morphology and Bonding Measured from Boron-
Nitride Powders and Films Using Near-Edge X-ray 
Absorption Fine Structure

L.J. Terminello, and A.  Chaiken, 
<body bgcolor=#f4eaff vlink=#551a8b alink=#ff0000 link=#0000ee text=#000000>


D. A. Lapiano-Smith,
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY

G.L. Doll,
Physics Department,
 GM Research Laboratory,  Warren, MI

T. Sato
National Institute for Research in Inorganic Materials
Tsukuba City, Japan

Submitted to J. Vac. Sci. and Technol.
40th Annual AVS Meeting, Paper AS-WeM4, 
November 17, 1993

Bonding in the  hexagonal, cubic, rhombohedral, and wurtzite phases of boron 
nitride was characterized using core-level photoabsorption.  In the boron and 
nitrogen 1s photoabsorption cross section we observed resonances that were 
unique to each of the phases and that were associated with the sp2 or sp3 
bonding present.  These spectroscopic standards were then used to characterize 
the bonding and morphology in an incoherent thin-film of BN based on its core-
level photoabsorption.   The film studied had predominantly sp2 (hexagonal-like) 
bonding with some evidence of sp3 (cubic-phase) bonds.

I. Introduction
The technological importance of boron nitride is evident from the increasing use 
of this material in tribological and electronic device applications. 1 - 4     In 
particular, BN's use in thin-films has drawn attention to it as an abrasive coating, 
or as an insulator / buffer layer in electronic device heterostructures.   Recent 
work by Doll et al.    5   has shown that the wide band gap cubic phase can be 
grown on a silicon substrate using ion-assisted, pulsed laser deposition.  Other 
routes of fabricating unique BN thin-films have been reported, including a 
hexagonal phase film  synthesized from boron and nitrogen containing precursor 
gases using a photo-assisted process. 6     Unfortunately, these meta-stable thin-
films of BN require non-equilibrium growth conditions that frequently produce 
amorphous, or incoherent, thin films.  Therefore, quantitative structural methods 
would be instrumental in determining the morphology of these films and would 
reveal structural information that could lead to new thin film fabrication 
methods.

Recently, we have shown that core-level photoabsorption  can be used to 
characterize the bonding and structure of fine-grained thin-films of boron 
nitride 7   .  In this earlier report we showed that core-level photoabsorption can be 
used to identify the bonding in an incommensurate thin-film - a film that exhibits 
no long range order.  The boron and nitrogen 1s photoabsorption , or Near Edge 
X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (NEXAFS), probes the element-specific empty 
electronic states. 8     This synchrotron-based spectroscopy has been shown to be a 
useful structural tool that has local electronic and bonding structure sensitivity.   
NEXAFS spectroscopy is not subject to the constraint of long range order, which 
makes it complementary to other structure determination methods.  

In this work, we have characterized the bonding of the hexagonal, cubic, 
rhombohedral, and wurtzite phases of BN using core-level photoabsorption.  In 
our measurements we can identify unique spectral features in the 
photoabsorption cross section and associate these resonances with each phase.  
Also, because core-level photoabsorption obeys dipole optical selection rules, we 
can concurrently identify the type of bonding present in the structurally 
characterized material, in particular, identify the presence of conjugated p bands 
indicative of sp2 -like bonding in an incoherent BN/ Si(100) film.  

II. Experiment
Hexagonal, cubic, rhombohedral, and wurtzite boron nitride (hBN, cBN, rBN, 
and wBN, respectively) powders were pressed into a Ta foil for introduction into 
the ultra-high vacuum apparatus that was used in the core-level photoabsorption 
measurements.  Samples prepared in this fashion were free of possible B or N 
containing contamination, and were less susceptible to charging during 
measurement owing to the conductive substrate.   The metastable wBN, 9    rBN, 10    
and cBN powders that would serve as our spectroscopic standards were 
measured using x-ray diffraction to determine the phase purity. 11    The cubic 
material was found to be pure cBN with trace metallic impurities, and the rBN 
and wBN were found to be 94 and 93 % pure respectively, with the remainder 
being the hexagonal phase source material used in synthesizing these two 
powders.   The crystal structures of these materials are shown in Figure 1.

An incoherent BN/Si film (BN/Si) was prepared using ion-assisted, pulsed-laser 
deposition according to procedures described previously.  5    The 700 Å thick  film 
showed no long-range structural ordering as determined from  X-ray diffraction.  
This indicates that this film had an amorphous, or incoherent structure (i.e., the 
grain or domain size was smaller than the coherence length of the x-ray probe).  12     
Other spectroscopic studies of this fine-grained film using infrared absorption 
indicate the domain size of the BN films are smaller than the phonon wavelength 
(about 2000 Å) and confirm the amorphous character of this film.   Thin-film 
samples prepared by other methods have produced fine-grained, or amorphous 
films as well. 13  

The boron and nitrogen 1s photoabsorption from each of these samples were 
measured using monochomatized synchrotron radiation .  These measurements 
were performed at  the IBM/U8 beam line at the National Synchrotron Light 
Source 14,15  and at the 8-1 and 8-2 beamlines at the Stanford Synchrotron 
Radiation Laboratory.  16    The NEXAFS from each of the BN samples was 
measured in one of two ways: a secondary-electron, partial yield mode, and a 
total-electron yield mode.  In both modes, nearly identical results were obtained.  
Briefly, to measure the core-level photoabsorption cross section the photon 
energy of monochromatic synchrotron radiation is scanned through the core-
level edge while monitoring the electron yield.  In the partial-yield mode, the 
secondary electrons emitted from the samples below 10 eV are measured, and in 
the total-yield mode, all emitted electrons are recorded.  In both instances the 
low-energy, long mean-free-path electron emission dominates the signal and 
therefore makes the measurements bulk sensitive and surface contaminant 
insensitive.

In our earlier report, the boron and nitrogen  1s core-level photoemission was 
measured and it revealed a B:N ratio of 1:1 in the powders, but was larger for the 
film.  The non-stoiciometry of the thin films is typical of rapid, non-equilibrium 
growth conditions. 13    The film made for this study was fabricated using a N+ 
ion assisted growth procedure, 5   and hence, had a B:N ratio close to 1:1. 11    
Charging of our insulating BN powders during photoemission reduced the 
tractable chemical information from this method, however, the NEXAFS 
measurements are much less sensitive to charging.

The B 1s near-edge photoabsorption for the four powders and the BN/Si film is 
shown in Figure 2.  In each spectrum the electron yield was normalized to the 
energy and temporal dependent photon flux that was measured during the 
NEXAFS measurement.  These spectra were then scaled to the largest feature for 
comparison purposes.  Similar procedures were used to prepare the N 1s 
photoabsorption data presented in Figure 3.  For each measurement, the sample 
normal was 54o with respect to the synchrotron radiation  polarization vector, 
thereby averaging out any angle-dependence to the absorption intensity. 17    

III RESULTS
Boron and nitrogen core-level photoabsorption was analyzed using the methods 
described by Stöhr 8   where resonances in the NEXAFS are interpreted as 
transitions from bound, localized core-levels with discrete angular-momentum to 
quasi-bound or continuum states.  Dipole selection rules, which govern these 
optical transitions, predict allowed transitions for 1s initial states into p-like 
empty final states.  These p-like final states - or p* states - are associated with 
anti-bonding molecular orbitals or empty bands in systems with p-bonding. 18    
These empty states are predicted for the hexagonal BN 19  , much like structurally 
similar graphite.  

In Figure 2, the most prominent feature in the B 1s NEXAFS spectrum for hBN is 
the narrow and intense transition at 192.0 eV.  This resonance has been observed 
and assigned as a 1s-p* transition in previous photoabsorption 
measurements. 4,20    These p-bond related resonances are associated with sp2 
hybridized, planar bonding and should be absent in sp3 tetrahedrally bonded 
materials.  In fact, the cubic phase BN with the diamond structure  pictured in 
Figure 1 is predicted to have sp3 bonding and should not have any strong p* 
NEXAFS resonances. 19    Figure 2 clearly supports this by illustrating that cBN 
does not exhibit this sharp 1s-p* resonance at 192.0 eV, but instead has an 
absorption maximum into s* continuum states at 194 eV as its dominant feature.  
The same conclusion can be made for the n-edge results in Figure 3; the feature at 
399 eV for the hBN  sample can be attributed to a p* resonance and is absent in 
the cBN NEXAFS.  This striking difference in the absorption cross section 
between two phases of the same material make NEXAFS measurements a 
valuable tool for better understanding the relationship amongst the bonding,  
atomic, and electronic structure in solids.

The rhombohedral phase of BN is formed by heat treating a mixture of NaBH4, 
NH4CL, and KCN. 10    Its structure (pictured in Figure 1) can be viewed as a 
distortion of the hBN structure.  Hexagonal BN has A-B-A stacking of 
hexagonally bonded planes, but rBN has A-B-C-A stacking.  Because the intra-
planar bonding/electronic interaction is greater than the inter-planar interaction  
- and the intra-planar bonding is identical - for these materials, the B 1s NEXAFS 
of rBN should be similar to that of hBN.  In fact, the rBN B 1s photoabsorption in 
Figure 2 exhibits a strong 1s - p* resonance indicative of sp2 bonding and is 
nearly identical to the hBN NEXAFS.  Using the core-level photoabsorption 
alone, it would be difficult to distinguish between the hexagonal and 
rhombohedral phases of BN.  This is not surprising because of the nearly 
identical local bonding and chemical environment surrounding each 
photoabsorber.  For the nitrogen edges illustrated in Figure 3, a similar 
conclusion can be drawn: there is little to distinguish the hexagonal and 
rhombohedral phases in the NEXAFS structure.  Again, this can be explained by 
the dominance of the 1s - p* transition in the near-edge structure.  As mentioned, 
both phases would have a similar sp2, conjugated p-bond leading to these 
resonances.

The wurtzite BN was formed by a shock compression process 9   and has a 
structure that can be viewed as a distorted cubic structure (Figure 1).  
Qualitatively, this would imply that the bonding in this phase of the material 
would be more sp3 -like than sp2 and should not have quasi-bound p-states.  
Band calculations predict 19   ample dispersion along all three dimensions and 
supports this qualitative view that the bonding in wBN is three dimensional - 
like cBN - and dissimilar to the planar hBN  - which has little or no electronic-
state dispersion along the c-axis of the material.  This assessment is supported by 
the B 1s NEXAFS in Figure 2.  In these data, there is no evidence of the 1s -p* 
resonances such as those found in hBN, and the edge onset is close to that of sp3 - 
bonded cBN (194 eV).  The resonances present in wBN are similar to those found 
in cBN and can be correlated with 1s - s* transitions.  Comparing the B 1s  
photoabsorption structure of cBN and wBN, we observe many similarities, which 
is expected for similarly bonded material with the same chemical composition, 
but near the excitation edge there is a more prominent resonance at 196 eV in the 
wBN NEXAFS than in the cBN.  This comparison is not as striking as the 
difference between hBN and cBN, but at the edge - and between 210 and 216 eV - 
the dissimilarity is clear.  Calculations that model the NEXAFS excitation 
process, and take into account the final-state core-hole interaction, should be able 
to model the effects of structural changes on the core-level photoabsorption 
features. 11  

Using the NEXAFS measured from these four phases of BN, we can then proceed 
to qualitatively assess the bonding of the BN/Si thin film.  Immediately it is 
evident from the B 1s photoabsorption in Figure 2 that the BN/Si sample has the 
strong 1s - p* resonance at 192 eV indicative of sp2 bonding as is observed in the 
hexagonal phase of BN.  The same is true for the nitrogen 1s photoabsorption 
edge shown in Figure 3.  One difference is noticeable between the BN/Si and 
hBN boron 1s spectra: the resonance at 200 eV is more pronounced in the BN/Si 
film than in the hBN sample.  In the nitrogen spectrum in Figure 3, the resonance 
at 407 eV is higher than the edge peak for the BN/Si sample, but the opposite is 
true for the hBN sample.  One explanation for this could be contribution of cubic-
phase, or sp3 related, resonances to the NEXAFS.  This is supported by infrared 
absorption measurements on this BN/Si film which indicate the presence of 
approximately 15% cBN. 11    While there is no unique evidence of cBN in this 
qualitative assessment of the near-edge structure of BN/Si, the NEXAFS 
measurements are useful for determining the sp2 bonding present in the thin 
film.

In our earlier report on using NEXAFS to determine the bonding in a BN thin 
film, we were able to determine that the film was mainly sp2 bonded material, 
but was not entirely amorphous.  It was determined through a polarization 
dependent NEXAFS measurement that the BN film was preferentially ordered 
with the BN hexagonal planes lying nearly perpendicular to the surface normal 
(within 20 degrees).  This method of determining the angular orientation of the 
p* states in a material has been described previously. 17     Our earlier observation 
of the hBN - like film being preferentially oriented with the BN c-axis lying near 
the surface plane was also seen in this film (data not shown).  This 
counterintuitive film structure was supported by recently published TEM 
results 21    that show laser ablated BN films can have such an oriented hBN-like 
component.  In fact, electron diffraction measurements of our film confirm this 
perpendicular stacking of hexagonal BN sheets. 22     McKenzie 23    has also 
suggested that  during the growth of carbon films in-plane compressive stresses 
due to ion irradiation can cause the c-axis of graphite to orient parallel to the 
substrate surface.

IV  CONCLUSIONS

We have measured the boron and nitrogen 1s photoabsorption cross section from 
hexagonal, cubic, rhombohedral, wurtzite BN powders and from an incoherent 
boron nitride thin-film.  From the near edge resonances in these measurements, 
we observe unique cross section features that can be associated with either sp2 or 
sp3 bonding.  The hBN and rBN exhibit sp2 bonding (as determined by the 
presence of an intense B 1s - p* resonance), while cBN and wBN NEXAFS 
indicate that only sp3 bonding is present in these phases.  All four observations 
are consistent with first-principles, electronic-structure calculations for each 
phase.  The identification of sp2 or sp3 bonding in these samples using B and N 
1s NEXAFS enable us to evaluate the bonding in an incoherent film of BN.  This 
BN thin film was grown on a Si substrate using ion assisted laser ablation and 
was shown to have predominantly sp2 bonding, like hBN.  However, there was 
additional evidence in the core-level photoabsorption that there was sp3, or 
cubic-like, bonding as well.  This work demonstrates that NEXAFS can provide 
valuable structural information from fine-grained, or amorphous, BN films.


Acknowledgments		
The authors would like to thank F. Corrigan (General Electric Superabrasives) for 
providing the wurtzite BN powder used in this study.  This work was conducted 
under the auspices of the US Department of Energy by the Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory under contract No. W-7405-ENG-48, and was performed at 
the National Synchrotron Light Source, Brookhaven National Laboratory, which 
is supported by the Department of Energy (Division of Materials Sciences and 
Division of Chemical Sciences of Basic Energy Sciences) under Contract No. DE-
AC02-76CH0016, and at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, which is 
supported by the Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences.

References

 1.	R. F. Davis, Proc. IEEE  79, 702 (1991).

2.	T. Lei, M. Fanciulli, R. J. Molnar, and  T. D. Moustakas, Appl. Phys. Lett.  
59, 944 (1991).

3.	J. H. Edgar, J. Mater. Res.  7, 235 (1992).

4.	P. King, L. Pan, P. Pianetta, A. Shimkunas, P. Mauger, D. Seligson, J. Vac. 
Sci. and Technol. B 6, 162 (1988).

5.	A. L. Ballal, L. Salamanca Riba, G. L. Doll, C. A. Taylor II, and  R. Clarke, J. 
Mater. Res.  7, 1618 (1992).

6.	D. R. Strongin, J. K. Mowlem, M. W. Ruckman, and  M. Strongin, Appl. 
Phys. Lett.  60, 2561 (1992).

7.	A. Chaiken, L. J. Terminello, J. Wong, G. L. Doll, and  C. A. Taylor II,  
Appl. Phys. Lett., 63, 2112 (1993).

8.	J. Stöhr, in Chemistry and Physics of Solid Surfaces , R. Vanselow,  R. Howe, 
Eds. (Springer Verlag, New York, 1984).

9.	F. Corrigan, private communication.

10.	T. Sato,Proc. Jap. Acad. 61 Ser. B, 459 (1985).

11.	A. Chaiken, L. J. Terminello, D. A. Lapiano-Smith, E. Hudson, G. L. Doll, 
and  C. A. Taylor II, to be published.

12.	C. A. Taylor II, S. Kidner, and  R. Clarke, personal communication.

13.	T. Wada and N. Yamashita, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.  A10, 515 (1992).

14.	D. E. Eastman, J. J. Donelon, N. C. Hien, and  F. J. Himpsel, Nucl. Instrum. 
Meth.  172, 327 (1980).

15.	F. J. Himpsel, Y. Jugnet, D. E. Eastman, J. J. Donelon, D. Grimm, G. 
Landgren, A. Marx, J. F. Morar, C. Oden, R. A. Pollack, J. Schneir, and  C. Crider, 
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res.  222, 107 (1984).

16.	K. G. Tirsell and V. Karpenko, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 291 (1990) 511.

17.	D. A. Outka and J. Stöhr, J. Chem. Phys.  88, 3539 (1988).

18.	J. Stöhr and D. A. Outka, Phys. Rev.  B36, 7891 (1987).

19.	K. T. Park, K. Terakura, and N. Hamada, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 20, 
1241 (1987).

20.	B. M. Davies, F. Bassani, F. C. Brown, and  C. G. Olson, Phys. Rev.  B24, 
3537 (1981); A. Mansour and S. E. Schnatterly, Phys. Rev.  B36, 9234 (1987).

21.	D. J. Kester, K. S. Ailey, R. F. Davis, and K. L. More, J. Mater. Res. 8, 1213 
(1993).

22.	A. Ballal, L. Salamanca Riba, and G. L. Doll, to be published.

23.	D. R. McKenzie, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. , to be published (1993).
 

Figure Captions

Figure 1: Schematic of the boron nitride crystal structures.  The hexagonal (hBN), 
cubic(cBN), rhombohedral(rBN), and wurtzite(wBN) phases of boron nitride are 
shown  with dark balls representing boron atoms and white balls representing 
nitrogen.  Note that the hexagonal crystal structure has A-B-A stacking, while the 
rBN has A-B-C-A stacking of the hexagonal-like sheets.  The wurtzite crystal 
structure can be viewed as a distortion of the cubic phase where the tetrahedral 
bonds in one direction are expanded to form a layered compound.

Figure 2: Boron 1s core-level photoabsorption for hBN, cBN, rBN, and wBN 
phases of boron nitride and a BN thin film grown by ion-assisted, pulsed laser 
deposition.  Each spectrum was photon flux normalized and scaled.  Note that 
the p* feature at 192.0 eV that is identified with hBN is also present in the rBN 
and BN/Si samples.

Figure 3: Nitrogen 1s photoabsorption for the hBN, cBN, rBN, wBN, and BN/Si 
samples presented in Figure 1.  Here the resonances are not as prominant as 
those at the B 1s edge, however, the relative energy positions and intensities are 
valuable for understanding the atomic distribution for the electronic density of 
states when compared to the corresponding B 1s features.
