MAGNETOTRANSPORT STUDY OF Fe-Cr-Fe SANDWICHES   
GROWN ON ZnSe(100)

A. Chaiken*, G.A. Prinz, and J.J. Krebs, 
Code 6345
Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375

PACS numbers: 75.70.-i, 76.50.+g, 75.60.Ej, 72.15.Gd


ABSTRACT

Magnetoresistance measurements have been performed on a set of 
MBE-grown Fe-Cr-Fe sandwiches with different chromium 
thicknesses,  12 ÅÅÅ < tCr  < 28 Å.  For 13 Å < tCr < 24 Å, magnetization 
measurements show that the Fe moments are antialigned at zero 
field.  For samples exhibiting zero-field antialignment, negative 
magnetoresistance steps are observed at applied fields where 
discontinuities occur in the magnetization curve.  The size of the 
magnetoresistance steps increases with increasing antiferromagnetic 
coupling between the Fe layers.   The  magnetoresistance  (r(H) — 
r(0))/r(0)  is approximately proportional to cos2(Df/2), where Df ∫ 
(f1— f2), and f1(H) and f2(H) are the angles that the individual 
moments of the two  Fe films make with the in-plane easy <100> axis.


*NRC-NRL postdoctoral fellow.
 Work supported by the Office of Naval Research.


	Fe-Cr multilayers with very thin Cr layers are unusual because 
the moments of the Fe layers are antialigned in zero magnetic 
field.1,2  The suppression of the antiferromagnetic alignment by an 
applied  field results in a large negative magnetoresistance.3-5 In 
simple sandwich structures with only two Fe layers,  both the 
magnetization and the magnetoresistance show well-defined steps in 
their field dependence.4,5 The large size and sharpness of the 
magnetoresistive steps  make the Fe-Cr system a promising one for  
applications. A recent theoretical study calculates the 
magnetoresistance  as a function  of the electron mean-free path and 
of  the number of  Fe repeats.6  An alternative approach is to study 
the transport properties as a function of the Cr layer thickness since 
the Cr thickness should strongly influence the magnetic coupling 
between the Fe layers.  An understanding of the relationship 
between the interlayer coupling and the magnetoresistance will be a 
necessary element in any fundamental theory.

	In order to study the  Cr-thickness dependence of the magnetic 
and transport properties, a series of single-crystal bcc Fe-Cr-Fe 
sandwiches was prepared using molecular beam epitaxy.   Starting 
with a well-polished GaAs(001) substrate, a ZnSe(001) epilayer about 
2000 Å thick was grown to achieve a flat surface.  Subsequent single 
crystal Fe, Cr, and Fe films were grown using a substrate 
temperature near 20o C and growth conditions similar to those of  
Baibich et al.3  Cr thicknesses ranged from 7 to 85 Å.  Finally, a 
polycrystalline ZnSe layer about 1000 Å thick was deposited on the 
stack for symmetry and for protection against the atmosphere.  
Details of the sample characterization are reported elsewhere.7   Gold 
contacts sputtered onto the ZnSe surface show good linearity.     The  
room-temperature resistivity of the sandwiches is typically 50 µΩ-
cm, similar in magnitude to previously reported values.3  All 
measurements reported here were made at room temperature with 
an excitation current I of 20 µamp applied at 219 Hz along an in-
plane [110] direction.

	The hard-axis magnetization curve for a sandwich with 13 Å of 
Cr and a total of 108 Å of Fe  is shown in Fig. 1.   Also shown is a 
theoretical magnetization curve calculated by minimizing the total 
energy  of the system as a function of the orientation of the two Fe 
moments, M1 and M2.   The energy density expression is5

 			E = (1/2)(E1 + E2) + J cos(f1 -  f2),			(1)

    where	Ei =   K1(a1i2 a2i2 + a2i2 a3i2 + a3i2 a1i2)  
			+ Ku cos2(fi — p/4)   —  Mi°H				(2)

with aji the direction cosines of Mi, K1 the usual cubic anisotropy,  Ku 
an in-plane anisotropy which is commonly found in very thin Fe 
films on GaAs or ZnSe, and fi(H) the azimuthal angle between Mi and 
the easy [100] direction.    Here J is a phenomenological parameter 
introduced to describe the antiferromagnetic coupling between the 
two Fe films. The theoretical magnetization  curve  found from the 
energy density expression  is in good agreement with the 
experimental data, as Fig. 1 shows.

	The transverse magnetoresistance (H ^ I) trace of the same tCr 
= 13 Å sample  is shown in Fig. 2.   For all of the Fe-Cr-Fe samples 
studied, the steps in the magnetoresistance data  occur at the same 
applied field as the steps in the magnetization curve.  In order to 
understand the dependence of the magnetoresistance on the 
orientation of the Fe moments,  two contributions have to be 
considered.  First, there is the intrinsic magnetoresistance of the 
individual Fe layers, which depends on the angle q between the 
applied field and the current direction.8 Secondly, there is an 
additional part of the magnetoresistance which is due to the 
suppression of the antiferromagnetic alignment.    One might  expect 
this second contribution to the magnetoresistance to be a function of 
the angle, Df ∫ (f1 — f2), between the moments of the two Fe films.6  

	The effect of the intrinsic  anisotropy of the Fe layers on the 
magnetoresistance can be gauged by examining Dr/r(q) at a high field 
where the antialignment has been suppressed.  Fig. 3 shows the 
magnetoresistance of the tCr = 13 Å sandwich as a function of the 
angle between a 6 kOe applied field and the current direction.  The 
data have been fit to the standard form8

 	 Dr/r (q)   = [Dr/r]long + {[Dr/r]trans — [Dr/r]long} sin2(q)     (3) 

where [Dr/r]long is the  longitudinal  magnetoresistance  (H || I), and   
[Dr/r]trans is the transverse magnetoresistance  (H ^ I).  The fit 
results in the approximately field-independent anisotropy parameter 
{[Dr/r]trans — [Dr/r]long} = -3.8 ¥ 10-3.  This  anisotropy  is  slightly 
larger than that that of pure Fe,8  a finding which is in agreement 
with previous work on Fe-Cr-Fe sandwiches.4

	In order to analyze the second contribution to the 
magnetoresistance, which is due to the suppression of the zero-field 
antialignment, one must assume a form for the Df-dependence of 
Dr/r.   Once a form has been selected, one can invert the Dr/r(H) data 
to obtain an "experimental" Df(H) curve.  Fig. 4 is a plot of Df  vs. H 
obtained from the data of Fig. 2 by assuming that the 
magnetoresistance has  the form 

	Dr/r (Df) =  [Dr/r]sat * cos2(Df/2)     				   (4)

where  [Dr/r]sat  is the value of the transverse magnetoresistance at 
magnetic saturation.   The form of Eqn. 4 is suggested by the 
magnetization curve,  which indicates that Df is 0o at saturation and 
near 180o at zero field.  The angular difference  Df calculated from 
Eqs. 1 and 2 is  also shown in Fig. 4.   The generally good agreement 
between the calculated and experimental curves in Fig. 4 indicates 
that the magnetoresistance does in fact vary approximately as 
cos2(Df/2).  Camley and Barnas6 previously pointed out that the 
transmission coefficient of an electron propagating between the two 
Fe layers will go as cos2(Df/2) when the angle between the two Fe 
moments is Df.

	Note that a completely quantitative treatment of the Fe-Cr-Fe 
magnetoresistance will require the formulation of a unified 
expression,   Dr/r(q, Df), which incorporates both contributions to the 
magnetoresistance.  This analysis is in progress.  At present, the good 
agreement between the two curves in Fig. 4 is an indication that the 
antialignment-derived effects are dominant.

	 In order to look for a relationship between the magnitude of 
the magnetoresistance and the magnetic properties of the 
sandwiches, the magnitude of the transverse magnetoresistance was 
determined for 8 different antiferromagnetically coupled samples 
with varying Cr thicknesses.   Figure 5 shows that the transverse 
magnetoresistance magnitude increases with increasing J/Ms, a 
correlation not predicted by earlier models of Fe-Cr 
magnetotransport.3,6  A relationship between the magnetoresistance 
and J/Ms is particularly interesting in light of the fact that the 
interlayer coupling parameter J is not a monotonic function of tCr.5,7

	The data of Ref. [3] show that in antiferromagnetically coupled 
Fe-Cr superlattices, as in the Fe-Cr sandwiches, [Dr/r]sat increases 
with increasing saturation field. The correlation of [Dr/r]sat with J/Ms 
could therefore have been  anticipated using Eqns. 1 and 2, which 
imply that the saturation field scales with J/Ms.5,7 Further progress 
should be possible in understanding the  Fe-Cr system once this 
interlayer-coupling dependence can be incorporated into a 
microscopic model of  transport.     Such a model will have to be 
consistent with the existing theory,6 which satisfactorily explains the 
dependence of the magnetoresistance on  temperature and on the 
number of Fe/Cr interfaces.

REFERENCES

 1.	P. Grunberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang. M.B. Brodsky and H. Sowers,  
	Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2442 (1986).

 2.	C. Carbone and S.F. Alvarado, Phys. Rev. B 36, 2443 (1987).

 3. 	M.N. Baibich,  J.M. Broto, A. Fert, F. Nguyen Van Dau, F. Petroff, 
	P. Eitenne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J. Chazelas, Phys. Rev. 
	Lett. 61, 2472 (1988).

 4. 	G. Binasch, P. Grunberg, F. Saurenbach, and W. Zinn, Phys. Rev. 
B 	39, 4828 (1989).

 5.     J.J. Krebs, P. Lubitz, A. Chaiken, G.A. Prinz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63,            
	1645 (1989).

 6.	R.E. Camley and J. Barnas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 664 (1989).

 7.     J.J. Krebs, P. Lubitz, A. Chaiken, G.A. Prinz,  proceedings of this 
	conference.
 8. 	T.R. McGuire  and R.I. Potter, IEEE Trans. Magn. 11, 1018 
(1975).  




Figure Captions

Figure 1:   Magnetization curve with H along a [110] direction for an 
Fe-Cr-Fe sandwich with a 13 Å Cr layer.  The data is indicated  by 
solid lines, while the calculated curve produced from Eqns. 1 and 2 is 
indicated by the solid dots.   The calculation employed  the 
parameters K1/M = 0.25 kOe, Ku/M = 0.005 kOe, and J/M = 0.125 
kOe.5,7  The solid-headed arrows indicate the orientation of the 
moments of the two Fe films at a given applied field.

Figure 2:  Transverse magnetoresistance trace in decreasing field for 
the same tCr = 13 Å sample as in Fig. 1.   The experimental geometry 
is indicated in the inset.   

Figure 3:  Magnetoresistance of a Fe-Cr-Fe sandwich versus the angle 
between the applied field and the current direction.  The fit is to Eqn.  
3.

Figure 4:  Calculated and experimental angular separations of the 
moments of the two Fe films as a function of applied field.  The 
angles are defined pictorially in the inset.  The calculated points are 
obtained by minimizing  the energy expressions of  Eqns. 1 and 2, all 
parameters being held fixed.  The "experimental" Df points are 
obtained by transforming the data of Fig. 2 according to Eqn. 4.

Figure 5:    Transverse magnetoresistance magnitude at 6 kOe as a 
function of the coupling J/M for a series of Fe-Cr-Fe sandwiches.  The 
coupling is varied by changing the Cr thickness.   The solid line is the 
best linear fit to the data.


