Low-Field Spin-Valve Magnetoresistance in Fe-Cu-Co 
Sandwiches

A. Chaikena), P. Lubitz, J.J. Krebs, G.A. Prinz, and M.Z. Harford
Naval Research Laboratory, Code 6345, Washington, DC 20375



Fe-Cu-Co sandwiches have been grown on glass and silicon  
substrates  using electron-beam evaporation.      Because the typical 
coercive field of  a thin Co film  is higher than that of a typical  Fe 
film,  the magnetization curves of these sandwiches show clearly the 
separate, sequential reversal of the Fe and Co moments as a function 
of applied field.   In the applied  field region where the moments of 
the two magnetic layers are antialigned, the spin-valve 
magnetoresistance shows a peak of  over 3% in amplitude at room 
temperature. 
 

PACS: 75.70.-i, 73.50.Jt, 68.55.-a


a)NRC/NRL postdoctoral associate 



	Both exchange-coupled1 and uncoupled2,3 ferromagnet-
paramagnet-ferromagnet sandwiches and superlattices display a 
large negative magnetoresistance (MR) when the moments of 
adjacent ferromagnetic layers are turned from antiparallel to 
parallel.   The isotropic positive magnetoresistance associated with 
the antiparallel alignment has been called the spin-valve effect.3  In 
superlattices which have an antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange, 
the antialigned state occurs at zero applied field,1,4 and is the 
ground state of the system.  In the uncoupled sandwiches, the 
antialignment occurs for a finite range of applied fields,  and is 
possible either because of an exchange bias pinning of one of the 
ferromagnetic moments,3 or because of different coercivities in thick 
and thin Co layers.2

	Another method of obtaining different coercive fields in 
alternate layers of  a superlattice is to make those layers of different 
ferromagnetic metals.   Shinjo and Yamamoto have reported results 
on Co-Cu-NiFe superlattices.5  The Fe-Cu-Co system is another good 
choice because of the limited miscibility of the Fe and Co in Cu at low 
fabrication temperatures, and because  the growth of these metals is 
already well understood.6      For the present study,  polycrystalline 
Fe, Cu, and Co layers were sequentially electron-beam evaporated 
from elemental sources onto untreated glass or silicon (100) 
substrates.       Layer thicknesses were monitored during deposition 
with a quartz-crystal oscillator, and checked via x-ray fluorescence 
measurements.   The  background pressure of the vacuum system is 
about 10-7 torr.

	Figure 1(a) shows magnetization curves for two Fe-Cu-Co 
sandwiches grown during the same run, but deposited at different 
substrate temperatures of 220 and 165 ˚C.    As the figure illustrates, 
sandwiches grown at temperatures 220 ˚C and above   reproducibly 
have square magnetization curves, indicating that the Fe and Co 
moments are reversing together.   However, in the sandwiches 
deposited at 165 ˚C and below, the  Co and Fe do indeed have 
different coercivities, as demonstrated by the presence of the 
shoulder  in the magnetization curve at H≈0.1 kOe.   For the 
increasing field part of the loop, the shoulder corresponds to the field 
region where the moment of the Fe film has already reversed, but 
the moment of the Co film is just beginning to rotate.   The 
identification of the higher coercivity part of the loop with the Co 
film has been confirmed by a study on a series of samples with 
different Co thicknesses.  Similar magnetization curves were reported 
in Ref. 5 for NiFe-Cu-Co superlattices.   The  disappearance of the 
shoulder in the magnetization curve between 165 and 220 ˚C is 
attributed to  slight interdiffusion of  the Cu and  ferromagnetic 
layers.    Recent Auger electron spectroscopy and  thermal energy 
atom scattering studies of the Co/Cu system by de Miguel et al.6  
show that diffusion of Cu into Co begins at about 177 ˚C.   No 
significant in-plane magnetic anisotropy is observed in the 
magnetization curves of these two samples despite the presence of 
bias fields up to 50 Oe during deposition.

	Figure 1(b) shows  magnetoresistance data for the same two 
sandwiches at room temperature.    The magnetoresistance is here 
defined to be the ratio of the field-induced change in resistance to 
the zero-field resistance. The 220 ˚C sample has an MR curve that is 
typical for thin ferromagnetic films, with a   peak of 0.5%  near the 
coercive field of the magnetization curve.   For the 165 ˚C sandwich 
the peaks in the magnetoresistance correspond well to the region of 
the magnetization curve where the Fe and Co moments are  
maximally antialigned, as expected. The magnitude of the transverse 
MR at magnetic saturation is  3.1% for this sandwich, comparable to 
the room-temperature MR previously found for uncoupled 
sandwiches.2,3  The anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) for the 
165 ˚C sample was measured directly at 3 kOe to be 0.41%.    The 
spin-valve component of the  magnetoresistance is the transverse 
MR (applied field  perpendicular to the current direction) minus half 
the AMR.7  Therefore the  component of the  MR attributable to the 
spin-valve effect is 2.9%.   A spin-valve  magnetoresistance  of over 
3% at room temperature can be obtained even in simple Fe-Cu-Co 
sandwiches by optimizing the deposition temperature  and the layer 
thicknesses.  

	Figure 2 shows  magnetoresistance data for two 
Fe51Å/Cu55Å/Co48Å sandwiches grown simultaneously at 165 ˚C, 
one on glass and one on Si.      The Fe films of both samples switch 
between  0 and  about 0.05 kOe.  However,  the Co moment in the 
sample grown on glass reverses at a significantly higher field than 
the Co moment in the Si sample, as demonstrated by the 
corresponding M-H loops (not shown).   This variability in the 
behavior of the Co layer is somewhat surprising given that it is the 
Fe layer which is deposited directly on the substrate.    The 
deposition temperature variation in Figure 1 also principally affects 
the behavior of the Co layer.   X-ray diffraction and cross-sectional 
transmission electron microscopy studies are currently underway to 
look for associated structural changes in the Co film  or the interface 
quality.8

	In order to make a comparison to the previous transport 
studies on both coupled and uncoupled sandwiches, it interesting to 
examine the   dependence of the spin-valve MR on individual layer 
thickness.    Figure 3 shows the variation of the AMR and spin-valve 
MR with Co  thickness.   The linear  thickness dependence of the AMR 
is expected and is due  simply to the increase of the amount of 
ferromagnetic material in the sample.     On the other hand, the non-
monotonic form of the spin-valve magnetoresistance cannot be 
simply explained.     The broad peak is similar to that observed by 
Dieny et al. in their exchange-biased sandwiches.3   Further 
investigation of this thickness dependence is underway, as is a 
detailed study   of the variation of the spin-valve effect with Cu and 
Fe thickness.

	In conclusion, the spin-valve magnetoresistance has been 
observed in a new  sandwich system, Fe-Cu-Co.   The large (>3%) MR 
reproducibly achievable in polycrystalline films on silicon and glass 
at applied fields of only 100 Oe may have technological significance.     
The spin-valve magnetoresistance and its associated magnetization 
curve are suppressed by interlayer interdiffusion, as indicated by a 
growth temperature study.    The variation of the spin-valve MR 
with Co thickness may be a clue to its fundamental origin. 

	We thank D. King for the x-ray measurements.  This research 
was supported by DARPA and ONR.	


References

1.  M.N. Baibich, J.M. Broto, A. Fert, F. Nguyen van Dau, F. Petroff, P. 
Etienne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J. Chazelas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 
2472 (1988).

2.  C. Dupas, P. Beauvillain, C. Chappert, J.P. Renard, F. Trigui, P. 
Veillet, E. Velu, and D. Renard, J. Appl. Phys. 67, 5680 (1990).

3.  B. Dieny, V.S. Speriosu, S.S.P. Parkin, B.A. Gurney, D.R. Wilhoit, and 
D. Mauri, Phys. Rev. B43, 1297 (1991).

4.  P. Grünberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, U. Walz, M.B. Brodsky and H. 
Sowers, J. Appl. Phys. 61, 3750 (1987).

5. T. Shinjo and H. Yamamoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 59, 3061 (1990).

6.  J.J. de Miguel, A. Cebollada, J.M. Gallego, R. Miranda, C.M. 
Schneider, P. Schuster, and J. Kirschner, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., to be 
published, and references therein.

7.  A. Chaiken, G.A. Prinz, and J.J. Krebs,   J. Appl. Phys. 67, 4892 
(1990).

8.  J. Kim and L. Salamanca Riba, in preparation.


Figure Captions

Figure 1.  (a) Magnetization curves for two Fe-Cu-Co-Cu sandwiches 
(see inset) grown on glass at  different deposition temperatures.    
The shoulder in the magnetization of the 165 ˚C sample indicates the 
region where the Fe and Co moments are  antialigned.    (b)  Room-
temperature transverse magnetoresistance curves for the same two 
samples.      The 220 ˚C sample with the square magnetization curve 
has an MR trace typical for a single thin ferromagnetic film, whereas 
the  165 ˚C sample has an increased resistance when the moments of 
the two films are antialigned.

Figure 2.  Transverse magnetoresistance for two 
Fe51Å/Cu55Å/Co48Å sandwiches which were deposited 
simultaneously, one on glass and one on a semi-insulating Si 
substrate.   The growth temperature was 165 ˚C.

Figure 3.   Co-thickness dependence of the anisotropic 
magnetoresistance (AMR) and spin-valve magnetoresistance for a 
series of Fe-Cu-Co-Cu sandwiches.   These samples were deposited on 
glass at 165 ˚C,  and had  the structure Fe56Å/Cu50Å/Co(tCo)/Cu30Å.
